Good afternoon and welcome
to the USB In-Deepth session.
We're going to go into USB both for user
client and kernel level development.
I'm Craig Keithley.
I'm the USB and FireWire
technology manager.
Actually, I'm one of two.
Greg Mullins, also in my group,
is another USB and FireWire
technology manager.
So with this session,
we'll go into what's
involved with writing
[Transcript missing]
Thank you, Craig.
We have a lot of topics to cover today,
so why don't we just get right on it.
Today we're going to give you an overview
of the IOUSB Family class in Mac OS X,
talk a little bit about the
objects that we have and how
we use them in the kernel.
We're going to go into some detail
into writing kernel and USB drivers
and how to decide whether to be
in the kernel or in user space.
A very critical part of
writing drivers is how to match
your device to your driver.
So we're also going to go into
quite a bit of detail into that.
And at the end of the session,
we'll show some demos on how
to debug USB drivers in the
kernel and in user space.
As you probably know,
you will need to use Project Builder,
which is Apple's integrated
development environment,
to write both kernel
and user space drivers.
If you are writing user space drivers,
you will be able to use
the debugging features of
Project Builder to debug your driver.
Unfortunately,
if you are a kernel space driver,
you will have to get down and
dirty with GDB and terminal and
debug your drivers that way.
Later on, I'm going to talk about whether
you should write a user space
or a kernel space driver.
This is the first decision that you
have to make when you decide that you're
writing a USB driver for Mac OS X.
So it's very important to know
what you're going to do there.
If you are in the kernel,
you will be able to use IOCAD's
object-oriented features.
So for example,
if you are writing a driver
that is going to be subclass
from our mass storage driver,
you will only have to write the
methods that you're overriding to
implement your device-specific features.
So it's a very convenient
way of doing it.
Rhoaads will talk later on about
user space drivers in some detail.
And as was mentioned in the
previous session on Firewire,
we use the device interface model in
order to communicate between user space
and our internal I/O USB family objects.
The USB family is in the kernel.
There's four or five
objects that we provide.
They are delivered as a kernel extension
that goes in the extensions folder.
We use this facility to
update USB without having to
give you a whole new kernel.
User space drivers can obviously
access the internal objects through
the device user or the device interface
client that I mentioned earlier.
This slide gives you just a
brief description of the internal
objects for the IOUSB family.
Those are the ones in purple.
And in a later slide I will
talk in some detail about them.
I just wanted to give you an
overview of where we fit within the
user space and the kernel space.
So let's talk a little more
about kernel mode USB drivers.
How do you decide whether you're going
to be in the kernel or in user space?
If at all possible,
you should not be in the kernel.
However,
in some cases you don't have a chance.
If you are writing a vendor-specific
driver for a keyboard,
You need to be in the kernel because
at boot time if you're going into
single user mode in the machine,
you need to have a keyboard.
There's no user land processes
running at that time,
so you have to be there.
The other condition is if your
clients live in the kernel.
For example,
mass storage or networking clients,
the file system or the TCP/IP stack,
they are in the kernel.
You have to be in the kernel,
and so you don't have a choice.
Again, if you haven't gotten the message,
we really recommend that you write
your drivers in the user space.
They are a lot easier to debug.
If you're in the kernel,
it's really easy to panic the machine,
and users don't like that.
So try to write user space drivers.
Just like all other I/O Kit drivers,
USB drivers are written
in the subset of C++.
The base class of all
I/O Kit drivers is I/O service.
When you write the driver in order
to load it against your device,
you will need to provide a matching
dictionary so that we can load it.
Later on,
we're going to show you on the demo
machines the different fields that go
into a dictionary and how we decide on
how to match it against your device.
The driver itself that Project Builder
makes is a KEXT package that
goes in the extensions folder.
And as we mentioned earlier
in the previous presentation,
the IO USB Family or your driver can
include sub-drivers in the one package.
This slide just gives you
an overview of the different
USB family objects
that are in the kernel,
the I/O USB device, I/O USB interface,
and I/O USB pipe.
I'm going to talk in more detail
about each after this slide.
We also have two other
The objects which are the
I/O USB device user client and
I/O USB interface user clients.
These are the user client objects
that are used to communicate between
user space and our internal objects.
When you plug in a USB device into a bus,
our family will create a
I/O USB device object for that device.
The provider of that device will
be the I/O USB controller class.
The I/O USB device object
is an abstraction of the
physical I/O USB device.
This class provides methods for
accessing the device descriptor
fields of the USB device.
We also provide methods for getting the
configuration descriptor of the device
and also for setting the configuration.
configuration for that device.
Once you set the
configuration for the device,
that family will go ahead and
create I/O USB interface objects
for all of the interfaces that are
in that particular configuration.
The I/O USB device class will
be the provider for all these
I/O USB interface objects.
Again, there is going to be one
I/O USB interface object for
each interface in the particular
configuration description of the device.
The interface objects are an
abstraction of a USB interface.
The methods that we provide for the
USB interface are those that allow you
to access the fields of the interface
descriptor and also allow you to
set alternate interfaces if they
are available for your interface.
When we create the
I/O USB interface object,
we will also instantiate
I/O USB pipe objects for each
of the pipes in the interface.
There will be one for the default
control endpoint and we'll also
create however many objects.
The I/O USB pipe objects are those
that are needed to match against
all the other endpoints that are
specified in the interface descriptor.
The methods that we provide for
the I/O USB pipe objects are
those that are needed to actually
communicate with the device.
So we have the read pipe,
we have the write pipe,
we also provide methods
to get status on the pipe,
to clear the... a possible
stall in the pipe,
etc.
The other two objects that we have,
as I mentioned before,
are the IOUsbDeviceUserClient
and the IOUsbInterfaceUserClient.
And these provide the
necessary glue for a user task,
user driver,
to talk to the internal objects.
You could tell whether you actually
have a user task attached to your
device driver or your interface driver
by using the IOU Register Explorer,
going down the tree to
find your driver node.
And you can then see if there is actually
one of these user clients attached to it.
The convention that we use in
our family for the Apple Supply
drivers is the following.
If the driver starts
with the I/O letters,
we intend that you could subclass that
driver and add functionality just by
defining new methods or overriding
some of the base class methods.
If the driver starts with the word Apple,
that is ours and you're
not allowed to subclass it.
However,
if you have a vendor-specific device,
you could just get our code adapted
to what your device does and use it
that way and create your own driver.
This is a list of the USB drivers
that we provide in the kernel.
These are all the Apple ones.
It's the standard mouse, keyboard,
hub driver.
We provide, just like in Mac OS 9,
a composite class driver that will
just look at that configuration,
find the first configuration,
and do a set configuration on that device
to create the interfaces for that device.
The two subclassable kernel drivers
that we provide are the HIT driver
and the mass storage class driver.
Again, the nice thing about living in the
kernel and being able to use these
drivers is that if your device
just is a little different than
one of the devices that we support,
you can just use C++ and override
those methods that you need to change,
and you have a lot simpler
driver than starting and
writing everything from scratch.
Those of you who attended the
USB overview session yesterday probably
will recognize the following two slides.
We are including them here because
we think it's really important to
understand how the driver stack of
the USB drivers is built up and in the
next slide how it all fits together.
So again, the IO PCI family will discover
the OHCI USB controller and it
will load a driver for that device.
That is our IO USB controller driver.
During startup,
this controller driver will
instantiate a I/O USB device for
the root hub of that controller.
We use IOPKID methods to match a driver
against that device and we have the...
The Hub driver sits there waiting
for devices to get plugged in.
For example, if you suddenly plugged
in a pair of speakers,
the Apple USB Hub driver will notice,
it will enumerate those speakers,
and it will create an I/O USB device
and attach it to the I/O USB controller.
In this case, for this example,
speakers are usually a
composite class device.
So the composite class
driver will go ahead and load
against this I/O USB device.
It will do a set configuration on it,
which as I mentioned earlier,
will load the
Create the I/O USB interfaces
for that device.
In this case,
I'm only showing one of those interfaces.
Again, we use the I/O Kit matching
code to ask for a driver to be
matched against this interface,
and we have the Apple USB audio
device driver loaded against it.
So this is how this works.
And any device that you plug in
will do the same thing and will
try to find drivers for it and
instantiate them for your device
as long as they're in the kernel.
This driver is, oh sorry,
this slide is here to show a
distinction between being a driver and
The distinction that we want to
make is who your provider is and
what member of which family you are.
For example,
the Apple USB audio device is a
member of the IEO audio device.
This is the base class
from which they derive.
They get their behavior, their API,
from the...
IOU Audio Device Family.
However, when they actually want to send
data to the pair of speakers,
they use the IOU USB Family as the
transport mechanism to get that data
from memory down to the speakers.
So it's sort of a dual relationship.
You are a member of the family,
but you are a client of
the transport family,
which in this case is the IOU USB Family.
But it could be another mechanism,
another family.
If there were FireWire speakers,
you could have FireWire.
In this example,
the Apple USB audio device
is a leaf node driver,
so it is not intended to be subclassed.
However, if we had a head driver
attached to an interface,
like for the buttons of a speaker,
as you've seen in other slides,
it has a little puzzle piece,
which means that you could
subclass that driver and add
the functionality that you need.
In Mac OS 9, we had a DDK that provided
some example drivers.
Some of them, or most of them,
we used internally at some point,
but they weren't the live sources
that we were using to release
the USB stack on Mac OS 9.
That has changed with Mac OS X.
We are open sourced.
We live in the Darwin repository.
So our live IOSB family
sources are there.
The module name is the IOSB family.
No surprise there.
If you haven't gone and become a
member of the open source project so
that you can check out the sources,
you should go ahead and do it.
Download it.
Look at it.
Look at the source.
Look at the drivers.
Borrow whatever you need.
Tell us where we have the bugs.
It would be nice if you said, you know,
line 23 of such and such a file.
But it is there for you to look at.
And we went through a lot of
effort to get this out into
the open source community.
So you are more than welcome
to go ahead and look at it.
Okay.
I/O USB family driver matching.
If we cannot drive your driver,
if we cannot match your
driver to your device,
then game over.
Why have the driver?
So it's very critical that we explain
it so that you can get it right.
And the first item that you have
to decide is are you going to be,
other than being in
kernel versus user space,
but once you have decided
that you are a kernel driver,
you need to decide whether
you're a device driver or whether
you're a composite driver.
You will specify in
your driver personality,
and we'll show you a demo where
that goes in a little bit,
whether you need to specify
the I/O provider class.
Other I/O Kit drivers use the
I/O probe score inside the personality
to give a hint to I/O Kit of
how important this driver is,
what the ranking is.
In the I/O USB family,
we do not use and you do not need
to provide the I/O probe score.
This is because USB and the USB specs
have a very definite set of criteria
that spell out how multiple drivers are
ranked and which one has the highest
rank and which one has the lowest rank,
so that if we find n drivers,
we can rank them and we can tell I/O Kit,
"Okay, try this."
[Transcript missing]
and I/O Kit will load that
driver first and give it a first
shot at controlling that device.
So again,
the USB Common Class Specification
is the document that details exactly
what fields you need to have in your
personality to match against drivers.
Just by chance,
here I have a copy of the table
that is used by the common class
spec to specify device as opposed
to interface driver rankings.
All the fields in the boxes are
fields of the USB device descriptor.
At the top level,
with the highest possible
rank that a driver can have,
is a driver that specifies the product,
the vendor, and the,
it's called BCD device,
but it's the release
number of the device.
One step lower,
we have the vendor and the product that
will just match against all drivers
of that vendor and product ID without
caring about that release number.
Down in the orange boxes we have
what we call the class drivers.
These are classes that are not vendor
specific and that is what the 0xff means.
You can match against the class,
the subclass,
and the protocol in the next to
last item or just device subclass.
So as we're going to show you,
you're going to specify these and this
is what the USB Family uses to generate
a probe score for I/O Kit to decide which
driver is the highest ranked driver.
As was mentioned in
the overview yesterday,
once I/O Kit has a list of
drivers that match to a device,
it will give each driver a shot
at denying whether they want to
control that device or not by calling
the probe method of that driver.
The default implementation for probe
method is to just return success,
so you don't even need to implement it,
but it is just here to give you a
shot at denying control of the device.
Later on,
you'll still get another shot at
denying control of that device.
Once the ordered list of drivers with
the higher one at the top and the lowest
ranking one at the bottom is created,
I/O Kit will call the start method
for the highest ranked driver first.
This tells you that your
driver is really starting.
You can do all your stuff that
you need to do to get your
driver in working condition.
If you return false from this method,
then I/O Kit will go, okay, well,
he didn't want it.
Let's try the next one in the list.
So you get this second shot at it,
but now I'm going to show you, or here,
Rhoads is going to help me out.
If we could have demo one
machine on the slides.
I'm going to show you how to
specify the matching dictionary.
So we have the project builder.
This is a sample vendor
specific driver that we wrote.
And this pane that we see up
there is the bundle settings tab
of the project builder target.
In there we have an
I/O Kit personality dictionary entry.
This is where the matching criteria,
among other things, is going to live.
The first item that I'm going to talk
about here is the CFBundle identifier.
This string needs to match the
CFBundle identifier that is
declared in the upper level.
The best way to do it is
just to copy and paste.
Because if it doesn't match,
your driver won't get loaded.
The next field is the I/O class field.
This is the class of the driver that
That you're going to use.
So here we have the
header file where the C++,
my software vendor,
my software company class is defined.
That is what you need
to put in that entry.
Next,
you need to tell us whether you are a
device driver or an interface driver.
And so you specify I/O USB device
or I/O USB interface.
In this case,
we have a vendor-specific device driver,
so we have I/O USB device.
Now, we don't have here,
but Rhoaads is going to type in.
We decided to make this a
vendor-specific device driver,
and we're going to type in the
common class spec fields that
are required for that device.
And it is the ID product, it's a number,
and the ID vendor, and it's a number.
Those numbers correspond to the,
obviously, the product and device fields
of the device descriptor.
Finally, we have this I/O Kit debug
dictionary entry.
This is used internally within
I/O Kit to put debugging
information out to the console,
to the system log.
It helps some in debugging
why your driver doesn't load
from an I/O Kit perspective.
However, right now it just says
that matching failed.
It is also used internally within
I/O Kit for other features.
It is actually a bit field
of different features,
but if you put 65, 535 in it,
it will match to all the features
and it will put out a lot of data.
Amen.
We do realize that right now it is
very frustrating to determine why your
seemingly good driver is not loading
against your device when you plug it in.
We are very aware of this and it's
not going to stay like that for long.
We will use the I/O Kit debug field
to actually put some meaningful
information out to the system log to
give you an idea of what was going on
when we tried to match your driver.
The final two...
Two entries in the bundle settings
tab here are the OS bundle libraries.
This is a dependency entry.
It tells I/O Kit that this driver
is dependent on the com.apple
I/O Kit.iousbfamily version 1.8.
If you were depending in the
future against an API that was
introduced in version 1.8.7,
you would put here 1.8.7 and
I/O Kit wouldn't even load you if the
iOSB Family version 1.8.7 was not around.
So that way you don't have to
do runtime checks whether a
particular API is available
like you used to do in Mac OS 9.
The final property is the
OS Bundle required property.
There is a driver matching that goes on
very early on during the boot process.
This property tells IOCAD which
drivers need to participate
in this early driver matching.
For example,
our mouse and our keyboard drivers
have this property because you,
as I mentioned earlier,
need the keyboard to go
into single user mode.
The reason I mention it here
is because if you are writing a
vendor-specific keyboard or mouse driver,
And you want to override
our USB class driver,
you need to also put that property there.
If not,
what's going to happen is the early
on driver matching during boot
time will load our class driver.
And then when I/O Kit, well,
I/O Kit then won't even scan your
keyboard or your mouse for a driver
because it already has one loaded.
So you need to specify that
if that is what you are doing.
If we could go to the slides now again.
This slide shows you which
I/O Kit methods are called during
the two-step driver loading process.
The first step is when I/O Kit is
looking for drivers for a device.
As I mentioned earlier,
the probe method is here,
which gives you a chance
to deny your matching.
You get the init, the attach,
the probe method,
and then you get detached again.
Once I/O Kit decided
that you are the one,
that you are the driver who is
going to control that device,
You get an attach method again and
then you'll get the start method.
The thing to take out of this
slide is that your attach method
will get called more than once,
so you have to be
prepared to deal with it.
When your device gets disconnected,
we get the following
termination sequence.
You first get a message method with
the KIO services terminated message.
This is your clue that your
provider is going to go away.
You need to cease and desist
all I/O to your device.
You need to stop everything,
return from it,
then you'll get a terminate
message followed by the other,
sorry, a terminate method call
followed by all the other ones
that I list here in the slide.
The key there is the first
notice that you get that your
device has been unplugged is
this services terminated message.
If you had your provider open
your device or your interface,
you need to close it at that time.
Now if we could go back
to the demo machines,
we have a vendor specific driver
that is a very dummy driver.
All it does is it spits out IO logs,
which by the way an IO log will print
a message in the system console every
time that the message is called.
Fernando Urbinan,
Rhoaads Hollowell And this is just
to prove you that it's not smoke and
mirrors and we are actually calling all
those methods in the order that we said.
So here we have a security dongle
and Rhoaads here is going to load
the driver so that it's available
for when we plug in the device.
Fernando Urbinan,
Rhoaads Hollowell He'll then open or do
a tail on the console log so that it's
available for when we plug in the device.
Fernando Urbinan,
Rhoaads Hollowell So that we see
any messages that get displayed when
we go ahead and plug the device.
Fernando Urbinan,
Rhoaads Hollowell And it crashes, no.
There we go.
We get the init method
followed by the attach,
the probe, the detach,
and again the attach method
and finally the start and we
successfully start and there we go.
Now when we disconnect the device,
we unplug it, boom,
we get all the other methods and
your driver after a minute or so will
actually get unloaded from memory.
So now I'll give keyspan to
Rhoaads and he'll tell you
more about user space drivers.
Alright,
we need to go back to the slides please.
[Transcript missing]
There is also a user client object
and a device interface or an interface
object used to communicate with an
IOU USB interface object in the kernel.
Unfortunately,
there is some confusion because the
generic name of these objects in user
space are device interface objects.
The term "USB" is used in the
USB world because of the use of device
descriptors and interface descriptors.
So what we really have with USB is
IOU USB device-device interfaces and
IOU USB interface-device interfaces.
Which of course is difficult to say,
much less fit on a PowerPoint slide.
So we have shortened that to be
device interface and interface object.
and an interface interface.
So,
what do you need to do if you're going to
write your USB driver code in user space?
Well, you need to use two
frameworks in particular.
The core foundation framework,
which gets you access to things
like CFPlugins and CF run loops.
And the I/O Kit framework,
which gets you access to
the I/O Kit functions as
well as the USB functions,
which are part of the I/O Kit framework.
This mechanism uses, as I've said before,
the CF plug-in model and the two
plug-ins provided by USB are the
IOUsb device interface plug-in and
the IOUsb interface interface plug-in.
We do not provide an interface
plug-in for the IOUsb pipe object.
This is encapsulated within the
plug-in for the interface mostly,
although there is one pipe in the device,
which is the default control pipe.
But the other pipes are
all part of the interface.
In the kernel,
those pipe objects are instantiated
when the interface is opened.
And then you have access to methods
within the interface interface.
within the interface interface plug-in
to determine the characteristics of
a pipe and to then send and receive
data over any of the given pipes.
The I/O Kit API is in, as I've said,
in the I/O Kit framework and it's in,
much of it is in the I/O Kit lib.h file.
The plugin API that we use is
also in the I/O Kit framework
and it is in IOCF plugin.h.
And then finally the USB interface
API is in the I/O Kit framework in the
USB subfolder and it's in Iousblib.h.
Again, the two interfaces we provide
for USB drivers are the Iousb
device interface and the
Iousb interface interface.
So, if you're running in user space,
you need to communicate
with a kernel object,
either an I/O USB device object
or an I/O USB interface object.
So how do you do that?
Well, the first step is to find
the correct kernel object.
These procedures, by the way,
are outlined in a document available from
the website called Accessing Hardware
From applications or
something along those lines.
So what are the steps involved?
Well, first you have to, from user space,
you have to obtain a Mach port that
you use to communicate with the kernel.
Then you have to create a matching
dictionary that's very similar to
the matching dictionary we showed
in the demo of the personality.
And the same rules apply to
this matching dictionary.
You must fill in fields from either
the device descriptor or the interface
descriptor based on whether your driver
is looking to be a class type driver
or a vendor specific type driver.
So you add these fields by
adding qualifications to
this matching dictionary,
and then you ask I/O Kit to give you
a kernel iterator of kernel objects
that match your particular dictionary.
So how do we obtain the master port?
Well, the API is defined in Mac.h and
it's just a call to IOMasterPort.
When you're done,
you should deallocate that port to
tell I/O Kit you're done using it.
So how do I create the
matching dictionary?
Well,
it depends on whether you're looking for
an IOUsb device or an IOUsb interface.
In the device case,
you ask for an IOService matching
dictionary with the device class name.
If you're looking for an interface,
you ask for the dictionary
with the interface class name.
Then you add qualifications
to the matching dictionary.
Again, these are the qualifications.
We showed a table earlier.
They are from the section 3.10 of
the USB Common Class specification.
And in the current shipping
version of the I/O USB Family,
the one in 10.03 and in
10.02 and 10.01 and 10.0,
we're very strict with
this matching dictionary.
What that means is that
if you want to match,
say, the second line,
which was ID vendor and ID product,
you must include both of those
fields in your matching dictionary.
And you may not include any additional
fields in your matching dictionary,
such as the device class
or the device subclass,
or else your matching
dictionary will fail.
So, and you also need to be aware when
creating these matching dictionaries
of the different rules in this section
of the common class specification
for matching against I/O USB device
objects and I/O USB interface objects.
Once you've added the qualifications
to your matching dictionary,
the next step is to get a list
of services within the kernel.
These are the kernel objects that
are subclasses of I/O service,
like every kernel object,
I/O Kit kernel object is.
And I/O Kit will return to you an
iterator of all of these services.
You then can access these
services one at a time.
to determine if it is in fact the
object that you wish to control.
So to use this I/O service T that
I/O gives you back through this iterator,
you then can call I/O create
plugin interface for service.
This is the call that
instantiates the pair of objects,
the device interface or interface
interface on the user side with the
device user client or the interface
user client on the kernel side.
This call creates those two objects,
sets up that communication channel and
allows you to then communicate with the
object that you want to communicate with.
So if you were creating a user client,
if you were looking for a user
client for the USB device object,
you would use the first call here with
KIOUSB device user client type ID.
And if you were interested
in the interface instead,
you would do KIOUSB interface
user client type ID.
These big long constant names,
by the way, are defined in IOUSBLib.h.
Once you have this IOCF plugin interface,
this is actually a very small interface
that does not quite yet represent the
device or interface you're looking for.
You have to then call a function called
query interface to say I'm looking
for this particular type of interface,
whether it's the device interface
or the interface interface.
Now let's say I have an
I/O USB device interface.
What can I do with it?
Well, this would be pieces of a
standard initialization sequence.
You would open the device.
You would then get a
pointer to the configuration
descriptors for this device.
You might then find the configuration
value out of one of those configuration
descriptors and call set configuration.
And then once you've
called set configuration,
you would be interested mostly in
looking at the different interfaces
that have now appeared on this device.
So you would create
an interface iterator.
And this would in turn return to
you I/O service T tokens for the
various interfaces attached to
this device and you could create
interface interfaces for each of them
to find the one you're looking for.
When you're done, of course,
you should close that USB device.
and release the interface.
So, now that I have an
I/O USB interface interface,
what might I do with it?
Well, you would call USB interface
open to obtain exclusive
access to this interface.
You could then find out how many
endpoints this interface has in it.
You might choose an alternate interface
if you know that there is one.
You might get the properties of
each of the pipes in this interface.
You could then call read pipe
and write pipe to read and write
data across this pipe to the
endpoint you're interested in.
And when you're done,
you would close the interface,
close the I/O USB interface,
and then release the interface interface.
How do you do asynchronous I/O?
From user space,
you don't need to be careful about doing
synchronous I/O versus asynchronous I/O.
Because the user space threads are
never running on the work loop,
it's okay to do synchronous
I/O all the time.
If, however,
you want to do asynchronous I/O,
then you need to take your interface,
whether it's the device interface
or the interface interface,
and create an async event source and add
that event source to your CF run loop.
And documentation for CF run
loop is in CF run loop dot h.
And you would then call CF run
loop run and your event source
and possibly more than one event
source would then get processed.
By that CF run loop,
calling back the callback routines
for your asynchronous calls.
Again,
the USB specific header file in the
I/O Kit framework is listed above.
As I said,
it's in the I/O Kit framework and it
provides the API for both the device
interface and the interface interface.
[Transcript missing]
Okay, now we're going to switch to the
demo machines and we're going
to do a little bit of debugging,
a little bit of a demo on how to debug.
We're going to show you first how
easy it is to debug a user mode
driver or application and then we're
going to actually attempt to do
a two machine debugging for kernel
mode driver using both machines.
Do you have a breakpoint?
No, no breakpoints.
Okay, so here is my user space driver.
It's actually just
written as a Unix tool.
So of course it has the main routine.
And what I'm going to do here is
I'm going to go ahead and just
put a breakpoint right there.
Is it built?
Go ahead and build it.
I'm going to go ahead and rebuild the
driver just to make sure that it's built.
And then I'm going to hit the debug
can to show you that here I am.
I'm at this line of code.
I'm creating my master port.
I have all my arguments up here.
This is the project builder interface to
GDB for those of you who haven't seen it.
So I create my master port.
I create my,
let me scroll this up a little bit.
I create the matching dictionary.
I'm saying I'm looking
for an IOSB device.
I'm going to go ahead
and plug the device in.
Well,
Let's see, I need to-- I can actually
see-- where is it?
I can actually show you the console,
the GDB console and the printout
statements that we stick in here,
you know, appear on that console.
So I create the matching dictionary.
I add the property for the
vendor name and the product name,
which are really the
vendor ID and product ID.
Someone has filed a bug with
us that those are terrible
constant names and I agree.
I create a notification for this
particular type of device and
at this point I think I actually
will have been notified about it
because I've already plugged it in.
So what I'm going to do is I'm going to
go into my notification routine and...
I'm going to set a break point at the
call to create the plug-in interface.
And I'm going to continue.
OK.
So now I'm at the Create Plugin
Interface for Service.
And I'm going to go ahead and
bring up the IO Registry Explorer.
So this is the device I just plugged in.
It's called USB Token.
That's the name string
that's inside the device.
What we can see here is that there is no
user client attached to this device yet.
This user client init object is used
to tell I/O Kit which object to create
when someone asks for a user client.
So now if I go back to my debug
statement here and create the
plugin interface for service.
Now if I go back to I/O... Well,
it should have created it.
Hold on.
Oh, I need to do the query interface.
That's got to be what it is.
Well, looks like I/O registry is not...
Okay, there's the device user client.
I don't know why this version
of IO registry is not updating,
but there's the IO device user client,
which is the kernel side object
of the device interface pair,
so that I now have a user mode
application communicating with
this IO USB device object.
So then what I will do is
I will call get the vendor,
get the product,
and get the release number.
We can see that the vendor,
if I look in my variables here,
the vendor is 1209,
which is what I expected,
and the product is 768,
which is also what I expected.
I do a little test to make
sure it's what I expected,
and it is.
And so I open this device
using the USB drive.
I'm going to do a quick
device open function.
Then I'm going to configure this device.
And so I'm going to first determine
how many configurations there are,
and I can see that
there's one configuration.
And I'm going to then get
the configuration descriptor
pointer for this configuration.
And here is the configuration
description pointer.
The configuration value that
I'm going to end up calling
set configuration with is a 1.
And I call set configuration.
And now,
IO Registry Explorer does update.
And when I go and I look,
In fact, now I have an interface
associated with this device,
attached to this device.
That interface appeared in the kernel
because I made a set configuration call.
But I didn't make it
directly in the kernel.
I made it from user space and it
went through the device interface
and created the configuration.
So that's pretty much the end
of this user debugging demo,
but you can see that it's pretty simple
to debug this using Project Builder
and GDB because you're in user
space and you're not trying to
step through code in the kernel.
So that's the user space driver demo.
Again, it's much easier,
so we highly recommend that
that's where you put your driver.
However,
in the case where you really need
to be doing a kernel mode driver,
for example, a mouse driver,
keyboard driver, mass storage driver,
and so forth,
We're going to show you the
techniques that you need to use to
do two-machine debugging with GDB.
This stuff is defined
in an I-O-Kit document,
debugging an I-O-Kit driver
or something like that,
that goes through these steps,
but we're just going to show you that,
in fact, it can be done.
So the first step that you need to do
when trying to set up a two-machine
debugging environment is you have
to know the hardware Ethernet
address of the other machine.
You look at the ARP table,
for those of you who are Unix people,
and you say,
and the first thing you've got
to do is you have to delete the
ARP entry for the other machine.
So I'm going to do that.
Then you have to create a static
entry for that IP address.
For that Ethernet,
that IP address to that
hardware Ethernet address.
All of this again is documented in
the debugging kernel driver document.
Now that I have that connection,
it's a permanent
connection in my ARP table,
which you can see.
And so now if I have
the driver over here.
Can we have demo two?
I can talk to it.
So can we split the screen and
put demo two on one of them?
Okay, he's going to load a driver and
we have a debug statement in
the start method of this driver.
He's going to plug it in.
And he's frozen because he's
got this debug statement.
So,
So I'm going to load GDB and then
I'm going to say target remote KDP.
This is in that document again.
And then I'm going to attach
to this other machine.
I am now connected to that other machine.
I can do a back trace and I can
see that I'm in a debugger call,
but I need the symbols for my driver.
I will use a command
called show all Kmods,
which shows me all of the kernel
modules that are loaded on this machine.
So that would be--
That one.
And then I'm going to say, okay, oops.
Here's the address of my driver.
And now I need to create
symbols for this driver,
which I built on this machine.
So I do KMODSIMS.
And because it is dependent
on the I/O USB Family.
And I need to know the
address of the I/O USB Family,
so that's in here as well.
So you can see that debugging is
somewhat more painful when in the kernel.
Okay, I gotta get the address again.
Okay.
Now I have a symbol file for this,
and so I add this symbol file to my...
to my GDB session.
And now if I do a back trace,
I can actually see all my line numbers.
And it didn't put it in.
Well, OK.
So we are out of time.
Basically, I can then,
I'm attached to this thing,
I can go ahead and continue.
So this machine is now
up and running again.
You can see by that.
And he can unplug the device.
And oh, it kernel panicked.
Well, we were actually expecting that.
We did that on purpose.
And if you look at the back trace,
you can actually see where it terminated.
And if I had the symbols
working properly,
which we're out of time to do,
we put a line of code in
there that dereferenced null.
And we did that on purpose
to try to debug it.
But again,
we do need to answer some questions.
So we've taken five minutes of
question and answer time to do this.
But that's the process you have to go
through to do two machine debugging.
So it's somewhat more painful.
And we recommend doing
user mode whenever you can.
Okay.